Pressable Sync: Add design doc (#1246)
Automattic/studio: docs/design-docs/sync.md

Reviewer: Maybe it's worth adding a short section to address the fact that we don't yet support selective sync?

Author: added a limitations section 0c289ba1805a713b797a03003469b6483dbb9bf0

# Sync WordPress Studio Sites

## About this doc

This design document describes the requirements, architecture, and data models for the **Studio Sync** feature.

## Context

> WordPress Studio Sync enables developers to pull a live site down for local development (including themes, plugins, media, and the database) and then push changes back up without manual exports or FTP. It supports both WordPress.com and Pressable sites with a Jetpack connection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WordPress Studio Sync enables developers to pull a live site down for local development (including themes, plugins, media, and the database) and then push changes back without manual exports or FTP. It supports both WordPress.com and Pressable sites with a Jetpack connection.
```

## Terminology

- **Sync**: Replicating files and database content between a local machine and a remote site in any direction.
- **Push**: Copying changes from a local machine to a remote (staging or production) site.
- **Pull**: Copying changes from a remote site down to a local machine.

> - **Staging site**: A staging site is hosted on WordPress.com and is connected to its production site. It is used to test the sync feature and serves as the source of truth for this feature. WordPress.com staging sites can sync with production sites and vice versa.

Reviewer: A few things here:
1. I don't really get the part about "serving as the source of truth for this feature". Users can sync from Studio to both staging sites and production sites, no? In what sense are staging sites the source of truth?
2. Nit, but we just defined "sync" as the thing that Studio does with WordPress.com or Pressable, yet here we say that "WordPress.com staging sites can sync with production sites". It might be worth clarifying that staging site sync is an entirely separate feature.

Author: Good catch! Done: 2a6aeb4a44efe521b0af4debd3fb2e95efd5f871

> - **Staging site**: A staging site is hosted on WordPress.com and is connected to the production site. It is used to test the sync feature and serves as the source of truth for this feature. WordPress.com staging sites can sync with production sites and vice versa.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Staging site**: A staging site is hosted on WordPress.com and is connected to its production site. It is used to test the sync feature and serves as the source of truth for this feature. WordPress.com staging sites can sync with production sites and vice versa.
```

> - **Production site**: A production site is hosted on WordPress.com and is used to store the synced site. We consider all Pressable sites as production sites.

Reviewer: I think it's worth clarifying why we consider all Pressable sites production sites. Pressable does offer staging sites, so the question can easily come up.

Author: I've updated the sentence bd788a5abdc1058eb781ef05c86f5db565571750. We may be able to distinguish between staging and production for Pressable, so we'll update these definitions later in the project if necessary. Thanks for the suggestion.

> - **Production site**: A production site is hosted on WordPress.com and is used to store the synced site. We consider all Pressable sites as production servers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Production site**: A production site is hosted on WordPress.com and is used to store the synced site. We consider all Pressable sites as production sites.
```

- **Jetpack Backup**: A feature of WordPress.com that allows users to back up their sites and serves as the format used to share site data for the sync feature.

> - **Connection**: A connection is a relationship between a local machine and a remote site. That information lives in appData `connectedWpcomSites` array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Sync Connection**: A connection is a relationship between a local machine and a remote site. That information lives in appData `connectedWpcomSites` array.
```
Nitpick, but "connection" is a very generic term, so I would qualify it.

Author: Done 32ebd0957cc37aa3f1edfefbebf27f46a2cb578c

### Backup format

The backup format is a tar.gz file that contains the site data. It follows the format of the Jetpack Backup, which consists of:

- wp-content folder
- sql folder with a .sql file for each database table
- wp-config.php file
- meta.json file

## High level implementation

### Connection

> Users need to connect a remote site to their local Studio site. When users click on "Connect site," a modal will open to select the remote site. The list of sites is fetched from the WPcom API at /me/sites and will include all their simple, atomic, and Jetpack sites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to sync, users must first connect a remote site to their local Studio site. When users click on "Connect site" in Studio, a modal will open to select the remote site. The list of sites is fetched from the WPcom API at `/me/sites` and will include all their simple, atomic, and Jetpack sites.
```

Author: Applied 8a250b41d9f594309b8187fe0eb06b3000b8ea07

> Users need to connect a remote site to their local Studio site. When users click on "Connect a Site," a modal will open to select the remote site. The list of sites is fetched from the WPcom API at /me/sites and will include all their simple, atomic, and Jetpack sites.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users need to connect a remote site to their local Studio site. When users click on "Connect site," a modal will open to select a remote site. The list of sites is fetched from the WPcom API from /me/sites endpoint and will include all their Simple, Atomic, and Jetpack sites.
```

Reviewer 2: Should we specify here also Pressable sites?

Author: I think it's ok just mentioning "Jetpack sites". Pressable sites will not appear automatically , only if they connect through Jetpack.

Compatible sites:

- WPcom sites with a Business or eCommerce plan.
- Pressable sites with a valid Jetpack connection.

> Only WPcom sites with a Business or eCommerce plan can be connected. If the site is Business but simple, we will ask the user to enable the Hosting Features. Additionally, Pressable sites with a valid Jetpack connection can also be connected to Studio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only WPcom sites with a Business or eCommerce plan can be connected. If a site with the Business plan does not have hosting features enabled, we will ask the user to do so before using Studio sync feature. Additionally, Pressable sites with a valid Jetpack connection can also be connected to Studio.
```

> When a WPcom production site is connected, we will also connect the staging site automatically if it exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When connecting WPcom production site, we will also automatically its staging site if one exists.
```

> When connecting the WPcom production site, we will also automatically connect its staging site, if one exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WordPress.com production and staging sites are grouped when users connect them, meaning they can easily sync with both sites from Studio. 
```
Optional nit.

Author: Done, I slightly changed the suggested text a22f2d2c3b03efe23295354341ef6494e9362e0b

> For Pressable sites, we cannot identify if a site is a production or staging.

Reviewer: I guess this is the answer to my previous comment. Might be worth spelling out that this happens because the Jetpack connection doesn't provide this data.

Author: We have an issue to investigate this STU-346. If finally is possible to identify staging sites we'll update the design docs.

> Users can connect multiple sites to Studio independently of their hosting provider.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we can specify that they can connect one site per each local Studio site?

Author: We'll change that behaviour. We'll accept multiple per each Studio site

Reviewer 2: On nice, in that case it makes sense 👍

> ### Pull

Reviewer 2: We could also maybe more explicitly mention that we overwrite everything with these pull and push processes, although this should be self-explanatory so it is not a strong preference.

Author: Applied the changes here: https://github.com/Automattic/studio/pull/1246/commits/a438ee5768d32f655434150a73db73c7e7060a4b

> When the user clicks "Pull," we make a request to the WPcom API to start the Jetpack Backup process. We actively listen until the process is ready to download the backup file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the user clicks "Pull," we make a request to the WPcom API to run a Jetpack Backup and generate a download link. We poll the API until the process is ready to download the backup file.
```
I think "polling" is a more widely understood technical term than "actively listening".

Author: Changed fd0d08d8ca0c391a4b72c38f743c3565d48c192e

> The studio will download the backup file and save it on the local machine in a temporary folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Studio will download the backup file and save it on the local machine in a temporary folder.
```

Author: Thanks 2c9f4fb9693883eb4a0bbc6df6c5b607c3248c83

It will run the import process to extract the backup file and save the data in the local database by executing the WP-CLI sqlite import command.

### Push

> When the user clicks "Push," Studio will create a Jetpack backup of the local site. Studio sends a request to the WPcom API to start uploading the backup file, and then an active listener starts to wait until the restore process is complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the user clicks "Push," Studio will create a Jetpack backup of the local site. Studio sends a request to the WPcom API to start uploading the backup file, and then an active listener waits until the restore process is complete.
```

> The backend will send an email after the Push has finished.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An email notification will be sent from the backend after the Push has finished.
```

> When the user clicks "Push," Studio will create a Jetpack backup of the local site. Studio sends a request to the WPcom API to start uploading the backup file, and then an active listener waits until the restore process is complete. The former site will be completely replaced by the new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the user clicks "Push," Studio will create a Jetpack backup of the local site. Studio then uploads the file to the WPcom API and polls until the restore process is complete. The former site will be completely replaced by the new one.
```

Author: Updated 1f8e5cf720f85974dd6b817a8cc27c375a07520e
